[Music]
hello and welcome to another episode of
boundless body radio
i'm your host casey ruff and today we
have another amazing guest to introduce
to now
travis christopherson ms is the author
of three books
he wrote tripping over the truth in 2017
all about utilizing non-toxic therapies
for the treatment of cancer
he wrote curable in 2019 which examines
the systemic failures in our current
medical system
last year in 2020 he wrote ketones the
fourth fuel
all about our endogenous fuel source
ketones
as an option to supercharge our
metabolisms he is a full-time science
writer
the founder of the charity foundation
for metabolic cancer therapies
and the co-founder of care oncology usa
he lives in the black hills of south
dakota with his wife and two children
and that is exactly where we are going
to start this episode
travis it's a pleasure to welcome you to
boundless body radio
great to be here casey thank you it's an
absolute honor i followed your work for
a very long time and i'm super excited
to chat with you today
i was a little surprised by the reason
that you are in south dakota
you told me this via email and i was
absolutely blown away
can you tell the listener a little bit
about the reason why you're in uh
the location of the world that you are
yeah so well i stepped back one bit i
met my wife here um we were both going
to the school of mines
uh south dakota school of mines of
technology in rapid city
and we graduated and you know we said
all these options of things to do
and she graduated as a chemist and so
the first thing that fell in her lap was
they were repurposing the home state
gold mine up in deadwood south dakota
into an underground physics lab
so it's close to a mile underground and
and they
you know go down a single shaft and they
they
retooled it into this this underground
physics lab and she got offered a
position up there
so that's why we stayed and that's what
you know she's been doing ever since
so why does the lab have to be so far
underground
so what they're doing is her project
i'll give you the physics 101 version
that i kind of understand
yeah so if you go back go back 14
billion years
in the big bang and there's equal parts
of matter and anti-matter created
all at once instantaneously and
according to the standard model of
physics
all of the matter and anti-matter should
have collided and annihilated
itself but as we know there's a sliver
of matter that remained
and and there's according to the
standard model of physics there's no
explanation for why this happened
we shouldn't be here there should be no
material in the universe wow
and so fast forward our back early 20th
century
an italian physicist came up with uh
name iran
came up with this theoretical
explanation for
that would introduce this sort of
asymmetry and material that would allow
for this to occur
and uh that's her project it's called
the miranda project they're looking for
this
a single event called neutrinoless
double beta decay
and it just astonishing rare event it's
like one in a trillion chance they'll
see it so they scale this experiment up
into these huge vats and detectors and
look for the single event
happening in germanium and if they can
detect that then it would rewrite this
the whole rule book of physics
and the standard model would be have to
be rearranged
so it's one of these massive you know
international
huge budget experiments that they're
doing up there that's amazing
is that the same thing i've maybe seen
this on uh like cosmos or something
um it's a big room with a lot of lights
and it's it's in a liquid is that is
that what that is
that is actually called lux that that's
in the same
deep underground lab up at home steak
that's looking for dark matter
so there are two separate experiments
the dark matter one
right same kind of thing you're looking
for this vanishingly small event and
this huge fat
i think it's liquid argon or something
like that um
to explain why you know the rotation of
galaxies are
again according to the center mountain
fix are just going too fast
so there's got to be some material out
there driving that we don't we've never
seen it so that's what they're looking
for
wow what is what is a conversation at
the dinner table for you guys
you guys are so so freaking smart
we like to watch cartoons and not talk
about that stuff at night
i love it i love it we had a period of
time earlier this year that we were
watching supermarket sweep reruns from
like the 90s
we can totally relate to that yeah it's
nice to tune out
wow that's amazing what a cool work well
i suppose you've done a few cool things
yourself so maybe we'll
we'll spend the rest of the time talking
about that uh tell us
tell us how you got interested in
biology
well biology for me i you know came out
of high school pretty directionless
i have no clue what to do with myself um
went up to montana state university in
bozeman montana
and we're just taking general classes
and i the first class i took
in cell biology was taught by this
just fantastic professor you know kind
of a bearded old farmer from
he just loved being in rural montana but
he went to princeton
and he was he was on the cover of life
magazine for putting the first monkey in
space wow um so he had this
really interesting background and career
but he started off talking about kind of
the stuff we were talking about about
the big bang supernovas the creation of
all these heavy met
elements the prebiotic evolution of life
and so forth and i just
instantly was hooked to biochemistry
cell biology
and kind of never looked back that's
always kind of been my passion
is that how you got introduced to
ketones and
the ketogenic state ketones actually
the way those came about for me was i
was looking when i was writing the first
book tripping over the truth which was
about
this group of scientists that kind of
came up with a different theory of
cancer
a metabolic based theory of cancer as
opposed to the
the current one which is called the
somatic mutation theory of cancer
and one of the sort of uh clinical
or um therapeutic mechanisms that came
out of that
their theory of cancer was a ketogenic
diet
so i started reading about ketogenic
diets and i ran into these papers by
a guy named richard veach another and
he's also had a very interesting
background he actually got his phd under
hans crabs
who won the nobel prize for the krebs
cycle
and and krebs got his phd under otto
warburg who was the one who actually
um yeah quite a lineage that is quite he
was the one
yeah he proposed the actually proposed
metabolic theory of cancer back in 1924.
he was the first one to show this really
you know distorted metabolism that
cancer cells have that they
actively burn glucose in the presence of
oxygen
and um so richard veach you know
he just had these just outstanding
papers on ketones he's really elegantly
written
papers on this unique biochemical
properties of ketones
and that's what caught me at first they
have these just astonishing properties
especially beta hydroxybutyrate
where they they're just imbued with more
energy so
per two-carbon unit compared to glucose
there's more energy in
beta-hydroxybutyrate
so when you burn it when you switch over
to that metabolism
you just create more energy you create
more atp
um and the spin-off of that is it change
sort of changes the way your electron
transport chain works
and you produce much your cell produces
fewer free radicals so there's there's a
really dramatic alteration in the way
the cell functions under this fuel
source and
it you know it's been marginalized
throughout the 20th century and we've
known about ketone metabolism since back
in the early 20s
it was the ketogenic diet was actually
the standard care for pediatric epilepsy
and then for some reason it just became
discarded
and became kind of perverted in this
version of a pathological
form of metabolism because it became
associated with diabetic ketoacidosis
and so people thought being in ketosis
from fasting or
any other mechanism is actually a
dangerous state
and then you kind of see the history
shift gary taub started writing books
fat became less and less demonized
richard veach's papers came out
and now it's you know it's exploded into
this potentially
incredibly therapeutic state for a vast
array of diseases
i look back on some of the textbooks
that i got that discuss nutrition
and they talk about the the pathways of
ketosis
and it's there and they talk about like
some of the things that could be viewed
as
as benefits but then yeah they don't
they don't go much further than that
it's almost like
i don't know if it was like actively
suppressed or if it's just do you think
it was like hidden in plain sight like
why did that information not reach the
masses sooner
yeah that that's a great great question
i look back in my biochemistry book from
and they had it was actually written by
albert lenninger the guy that discovered
mitochondria
and he just there's a short sentence on
ketosis about how
you enter the state if you're fasting or
eating reduced calorie diets
and people should be monitored because
they could enter ketoacidosis and you
know we know that's not even remotely
true now that
a perfectly healthy person under that
state is fine
you know and they knew that you could
you know therapeutic fasting was really
popular
in the 50s 60s and so they would fast
people with obesity for
months on end and back in the 60s the
longest fast ever recorded was 385
days by a scottish man and he was fine
there was zero problems
never entered ketoacidosis so i have no
idea why i got changed into this
uh version of being you know this kind
of pathological state it just doesn't
make any sense
wow so and just to clarify like for
ketoacidosis and i think i think people
get super confused about this and again
i'm not sure if this is
on purpose or not but that can only
happen to a type 1 diabetic is that
correct
right type 1 or i believe you know
really poorly controlled type 2
diabetics can can get there but yeah
typically type 1.
gotcha right okay you mentioned some of
those fasting studies that has to
include the cahill study is that correct
yeah yeah those are in there man so
good yeah that was in
pale was the first one to really look at
ketosis through a different lens like
perhaps this is this kind of elegant
evolutionary adaptation to being without
food you know it was certainly
our ancestors had times of deprivation
throughout our tenure
and um he looked at it in this lens and
he he did this
crazy experiment where they put
catheters into the
the vein the arteries and the veins of
the kidneys
liver and the brain so the jugular and
the carotid arteries
and had these patients they were fasted
for 40 days he inserted those catheters
and he measured the amount of ketones
and glucose entering and exiting
the organs and the men the sort of the
dilemma at that time is nobody could
figure out how
a human being could survive a fast
because it was thought that the brain
could only burn blood glucose they knew
it couldn't burn fatty acids they can't
get past the blood-brain barrier
so they thought it could only burn
glucose and the brain is a huge
metabolic sink it accounts for about 20
of our basal metabolism so when you do
the math
a human being should only be able to
fast for 18 days
before they die and they knew that
wasn't true so he was the first one to
establish that yeah
once you convert over to ketosis the
brain
will switch to burning ketones about
two-thirds of the
of the energy will be supplied by
ketones yeah i just
love those graphs that he put together
and shows the percentages
of you know your fuel source coming from
you know the different sources and how
the different organs
all convert over to to using ketones
until it gets to like the very end and
it's just like
red blood cells and part of the kidneys
basically are the only things using
glucose
what an amazing study i mean ethically
could could they even do that
study again today if they wanted to i
doubt it yeah no irb committees now are
so much more
um less permissive than they used to be
in the past know those days you could
get away
you know with anything i i was just in
fact i was just chatting about another
for somebody else about another
procedure that you know i don't know if
you're aware of fecal transplants
yeah absolutely um yeah they
had a hard time getting established but
they've actually been known since
1958 and um the doctor that did it
he did it on four patients with
dysentery he just did it
and can you imagine that today if you
that was before there was nothing known
about it it was just thought that
you know that feces was completely
pathological there's nothing good in it
and he just had a hunch that well maybe
it's got something to do with gut
bacteria you know the microbiome wasn't
even known back then
maybe i should just try this and he did
and it cured these four patients and
that that was also kind of forgotten
until
pretty fairly recently but yeah in those
days doctors could get away with almost
anything
that's crazy i mean that's a that's a
big cornerstone of your second book
curable is that correct
yeah yeah i tell the story of the fecal
transplant just it's so interesting that
that book looks at really
kind of why the inefficiencies in modern
healthcare today
why it's um why it's so inefficient and
one of the things we do is we we
don't capitalize on these extremely
valuable
but dirt cheap therapies like fecal
transplants fasting those kind of things
wow so crazy just blows my mind if we go
back to cancer i find this so
interesting um and and personal
definitely i lost my mom to cancer
um can you can you tell us what cancer
is like how how we should think about
different cancers are there different
types of cancer or is you know kidney
cancer the same as pancreatic cancer are
they are they different are they the
same
well that okay that that's a fantastic
question that's still being unraveled
and the the history of
that that's a very that's the most
interesting question to me is what
is it the cancer is why does it occur
what causes it what drives it
and that is still you know that that
science is still being worked out
um it was thought it was worked out in
1976 there's a seminal group of
experiments by harold barlows and
michael bishop that established that
cancer was caused by mutations to dna
and this kicked off the somatic mutation
theory of cancer that
certain mutations to certain genes
rewire the cellular functionality
towards
unproliferated growth and this ushered
in the area of targeted therapies
no one really ever looked back before
that there was competing theories there
was warburg's metabolic theory there was
a viral theory
um but after that nobody looked back
this was just cemented in stone
but then what happened in 2006 there was
the technology advanced to where we
could sequence genomes extremely cheaply
and efficiently
and there's a project launch called the
cancer genome alice and the goal of this
was to sequence the genomes of all
different types of cancer
and identify the signature of mutations
that was driving it right
so prostate lung all of these it was
assumed that there would be
a fairly tidy group of consistent
mutations that drove each type of cancer
and that project officially ended i
think 2012
and just left a wake of confusion what
what the overwhelming
takeaway from that is cancer is ex from
the genetic mutation level is just
a tornado of genetic chaos there is very
little consistency from one cancer to
the next
then you even find cases where there's
there's one mutation or zero mutations
yet you still have this cancer
so this group of scientists you know
just moved on from that point they're
like okay this is not a genetic disease
there's got to be some other driving
driving fundamental driver of it and
that was the first book tripping over
the truth tom seyfried
went back to warburg's original theory
which states that the original damage
occurs to mitochondria
the cell can't produce energy anymore so
it switches to this fermentation or
anaerobic pathway and that's what you
see when you see a pet scan
is the the cancer cells just voraciously
consuming
blood glucose and kicking out lactic
acid and then
from that conversion you get an
epigenetic signal that tells the dna to
express
genes for growth for uncontrolled growth
so it's a completely different
view of what cancer is um so
what your question can you tell the
different types the one consistency that
you have
between all types of cancer is that
warburg effect that shift
in metabolic um the way they process
blood sugar so from a therapeutical
standpoint
that's a wonderful thing now you have
this big target that's on on all cancers
but
from a genetic can standpoint no you
really it's difficult to tell
what one type from the next beyond you
know the obvious histology of the
tissue type of origin i think it was
jason fung in his last book the cancer
code that talked about like even the
same cancer and two people in the
waiting room can be completely different
is that right
yeah yeah the cancers can just be wildly
different they can
you know once they once metastasis
starts they can
get subclonal populations and start
behaving differently
it's just a disease we just don't know
it doesn't play by normal rules
it's so close to our physiology you know
if somebody has an infection you can
give them an antibiotic
and the antibiotic will go into a
bacterial cell wall
and bind it up and kill the bacteria
because its physiology is different from
ours but cancer
co-ops so much of what healthy cells use
to survive
that it's just a brutal problem when it
comes to therapies
we were fortunate enough to have dr
seyfried i know you mentioned him
already what a what a warrior that guy
has been for so long and
what what an amazing message he had to
share and he taught us a little bit
about what you were just mentioning
which is the
metabolism of cancer cells is kind of
like it's
it it's kind of broken it's not like the
cancer is advancing
in the way that we think it's it's like
advancing
um you know like a better technology
it's actually like a reversion in the
way that we metabolize energy is that
correct
that's exactly right yeah yeah yeah it's
kind of funny what they call
yeah cancer is like this evolution where
it's
gaining function by getting mutations
it's kind of absurd but it's always been
described that way
yeah the way in dr seyfried's sort of
version of it it's a reversion
back to this sort of primal
energy generation and you look back
you know i think it was three billion
years ago that my
multicellular life began before that it
was all single cellular life
and the only biological imperative of
single cellular life is to divide
over and over and over again and it
ferments
it uses the same sort of energy
generation the cancer does
and so it looks like cancer's kind of a
hopscotch back to this
old sort of evolution of cells back in
the beginning
um you know back before there was even
multicellular organisms
and it's it's not a very like
intelligent kind of process because
if cancer is proliferating and there's
nothing to stop it eventually it's going
to kill its host and by
by definition kill itself exactly
exactly right right yeah so it doesn't
have yeah
there's no sort of selection pressures
on it to
to um to keep it going yeah it's it's
but it's what it is
is the reason it's still there is it's
it's a basic
um you know it's a fundamental need of
what
we have in our in in life and you look
at
when fertilization occurs and then
embryogenesis those early embryonic
cells
look very much like cancer cells they're
highly glycolytic they're invasive
they sort of they they can escape the
immune system
and so that early functionality of those
cells is
what kind of what cancer cells are
hopscotching back to and you look at the
genetic expression
and it's cancer cells are expressing
many of the same genes of early
embryogenesis
and that's why i say it's so hard to
therapeutically attack it because it's
just built into our core biology
okay gotcha i'm so glad you went there
so let's
let's just let's say that is correct
everything you just said about cancer
and and how it proliferates is correct
what are the implications
from that like what would you logically
come to a conclusion like okay
if cancer does this if it looks like
this it's not you know
doesn't share genetic properties with
other cancers what
what implications does that tell you
about how we should be
treating cancer yeah
safer dr safer's got a very unique
approach called the press
pulse approach so you the target you're
looking at now is that defective
metabolism
that's right with differentiating it
from normal healthy cells
and so just start with the ketogenic
diet this press pulse therapy the idea
is you
you make cancer cells uncomfortable
first so they're weakened and then you
add in these pulse therapies it could be
anything that sort of had that can kill
cancer cells like hyperbaric oxygen
um some types of drugs things like that
but they're just short pulses
so what the ketogenic diet does why it's
so unique
is is tom what tom has done safely has
demonstrated
that the mitochondria cancer cells are
very
messed up right they're damaged so the
cancer cells have reverted to this
fermentation pathway and they're not
generating energy with oxygen
so when you switch to ketosis what you
do is you drive down blood glucose and
you
replace that with a fuel that has to be
burned in mitochondria
so cancer cells can't burn it so they're
odd they're
weakened because they just don't have a
fuel source that they normally have and
on this
on the other side healthy cells it's
very easy to show are made more robust
by ketones everything's improved
antioxidant status energy status
everything
so you have this wonderful therapeutic
differential between
the cancer cell and the healthy cell and
this has been shown
there's cool studies i think done by
walter longo where
they had um patients fast for 48 to 72
hours before chemotherapy
and or radiation and the the amount of
side effects that they experience
objective ones like you know the number
of times they might vomit or bow source
which is dramatically reduced so that's
because of that therapeutic
um differential where the healthy cells
are just made robust to withstand those
oxidative
salts but but it's it's a you know it's
an interesting approach because you can
attack
theoretically any cancer type using that
because of this defective metabolism
and it's early stage you know we know a
little bit about the ketogenic diet
there's case studies
there's a lot of mouse work that shows a
lot of potential my foundation is trying
to fund
the biggest trial to date for the
ketogenic diet and glioblastoma that's a
brain cancer
at cedar cyanide and we just have a
small funding gap but we're
we're pretty confident we'll get there
soon wow i think that was such a great
point to make that it's beneficial on
both ends it's beneficial
to decrease the glucose and it's
beneficial also to increase the ketones
yeah yeah it's it's you never it's so
rare to see therapies that are
you know have that differential between
normal cells and healthy cells
almost always when you throw small
molecules into a body
they're going to give you a therapeutic
effect but they're also going to gum up
health you know normal pathways and give
side effects
you know and this is one of those few
therapies that you just get this
beautiful differential
and there doesn't seem to be any there's
no harm
you know there's no it's completely safe
so
it just needs to be explored and the
problem is it hasn't been is simply
because of money this is a free therapy
and there's just no incentive to run
these clinical trials
wow that's so interesting okay so so
that's the non-toxic
you know that's one thing you can do
that's non-toxic what what about
let's contrast that with a more toxic
form of cancer treatment that we do
it just it strikes me as so bizarre that
that we have this free thing that is
beneficial in multiple ways
protects you and eliminates a fuel for
you know the cancer
yet we do things where we just like
carpet bomb the entire body or
shoot you know radiation at ourselves
like how do we contrast those two things
i see yeah well
when you when you read the history of
medicine you
you will just be just
it's impossible to not be as astonished
how bad it can go
right how long things can go on that are
unnecessary
and how long it takes to replace them
and and so
if you could show for example that a
ketogenic diet with say hyperbaric
oxygen was better than radiation
first thing is it's going to be brutally
hard to conduct that clinical trial
because
you're asking patients to forego
standard care and most oncologists won't
even do that
they'll say no i'm not going to put my
patient in that situation
and and so it just it takes incredibly
long one example that is
they used to do the radical mastectomy
for breast cancer
and it's just a brutally disconfiguring
procedure where they go in and it was
thought that
the further you cut away from a primary
tumor the better
chances of survival for the patient
because you're theoretically getting
more of those cancer cells that are
that are metastasizing outward so they
would cut out
ribs collar bones the muscles of the
pectoris um
all the lymph nodes of the neck and this
you know these women's
shoulders were caved in they would take
years of recovery lymphedema their arms
would swell
and this was based nothing more than
pretty much the intuition of the cancer
surgeons
this went on until the for a hundred
years almost until the 1980s
when a few surgeons started saying i
don't think this is necessary i think
you know simple mastectomy or a lump
activity might have the same result
so they decided to conduct a trial a
huge multi-center trial again they
almost couldn't get surgeons to do it
because
they called them murderers they said
that the ones that are organizing this
trial were murdering these women
when they finally conducted it showed
zero benefit for the radical mastectomy
but it was propagated for a hundred
years and so i
you know i i think we're in the same
sort of dark ages with oncology we're
still using
these sort of medieval toxic therapies
that you know radiation is 100 years old
wow um and we haven't moved past that so
it's just yeah
the the inertia the slowness of it is
is incredibly frustrating wow with so
many people dying every single day
i mean i have a friend she must have
been in her
mid to late 30s she had a double
mastectomy done
as preventative does that make any sense
did she have the bracka gene i don't
know
yeah that that that's usually the only
time they would do that
yeah otherwise it would make no sense
tell me about that gene does that
guarantee that you're going to get
breast cancer or make it like highly
highly likely or something
it doesn't increase it i mean doesn't
guarantee it but yes it makes it
much more likely that you'll get breast
or ovarian cancer that was uh
um angelina jolie she wrote a um op-ed
in the new york times called
my medical choice and she opted to get a
a
double mastectomy and i think her a
hysterectomy because her mom died of
breast cancer and she had the bracket
gene
now you know you can debate
the statistics probability how
successful preventative techniques could
be
but you know when people are putting
that vulnerable position and
they're terrified you know that that's
those kind of things are common yeah
totally i
i can't relate to that that's crazy um
okay so you mentioned radiation being a
hundred years old so
what is the goal of radiation in
particular like what what are they
trying for when somebody is is getting
that done
radiation you know it's a very simple
therapy it just all it does is it
re it's uh ionizing radiation will split
water
create free radicals and cancer cells
are very vulnerable to oxidative stress
or free radicals so it's just
literally just blasting them with free
radicals until they die
and and the trouble with um radiation is
is you
really gotta you gotta aim well
because anything you hit on the outside
or any healthy tissue is just going to
be
you know bombarded destroyed it's very
carcinogenic so
the borders if you miss can you can get
cancers that erupt from the from the
radiation itself later wow that
that stat right there just i didn't i
didn't
i learned that recently and that blows
my mind that you're using something
to treat cancer but can also cause more
cancer down the road
yeah and that goes for all the key you
know the traditional chemotherapy same
thing
when you treat even successfully treat
for hodgkin's or you know childhood
leukemia
those kids those people down the road
have hugely increased chances of other
types of cancer wow
interesting and then what about
chemotherapy when when did that kind of
come about and how has that evolved over
time
the original chemotherapy pretty pretty
interesting story came
in world war ii and it was a
long-standing dream to get a
chemotherapeutic agent because prior to
that
also all they had was surgery and
radiation so this idea of you know
a medicine that could flow throughout
the body and attack cancer was this
long-standing dream
and all they knew about cancer at that
point was it was
uncontrolled pathological cell division
so that's all they could really target
was dividing cells
and so in world war ii that the allies
had forces in bari harbor
in uh italy and it was thought that the
luftwaffe the german air force was
struck
stretched too thin to see them and
attack them but they actually did they
attacked them drop bombs
blew up the us harvey ship which
contained i think 120 000 pounds of
mustard gas
wow and that's spread out all over the
harbor all over the troops a town that
killed about a thousand people
the the medical staff flew over from the
states
grabbed tissue samples brought them back
and what they noticed when they brought
them back was the lymphoid tissue was
depleted so the white blood cells and
lymph nodes and the bone marrow was was
gone
then they got this crazy idea well
that's what lymphoma is is
uncontrolled white blood cell growth
maybe this could be a chemotherapeutic
agent
and so they injected people with mustard
gas and that was the first chemotherapy
agent and they were able to induce these
sort of flickering remissions
but you know they didn't hold the cancer
always came back
but that that established that you know
the therapeutic route
were these extraordinarily toxic
molecules that would go in and just
target cell division
they didn't use muscle gas for very long
but the ones that came after were very
similar they would lock up dna prevent
cell division
come in with these you know litany of
side effects and that that went on
until the late 70s they pushed and
pushed and pushed with these handful of
chemotherapeutic drugs they had until it
just got too
too hard to watch they tried to cure
every cancer with them and just for
killing the patients before they were
even touching the cancer wow crazy so
how has that evolved over time like is
is chemotherapy more i mean obviously
it's you know better than it used to be
what what has the highest success ratio
is it a combination of radiation and
chemotherapy
uh adding a surgery to it does that
improve things like where do we
where do we see the most benefit from
using a traditional
you know arguably toxic kind of cancer
treatment
yeah it varies for every type of cancer
so the chemotherapies
realize their potential pretty quick and
they they're very good
as standard care for a certain amount of
cancers like testicular cancer hodgkin's
disease
um childhood leukemias things like that
um
their efficacy goes down for solid
tumors beyond those type cancers and
their
percentage of survival for people after
that
surgery you know if you can get to a
cancer early with surgery that's always
the best case
and 95 of the reason people die from
cancer is metastasis so if you can get
to it early cut it out
that's always always the best you know
best chances from a therapy but you know
there's so many things coming out casey
there's so many targeted drugs
immunotherapies
every cancer has got a different
standard of care there's targeted agents
now
um it's just very
incredibly varied from cancer to cancer
in atoms i've heard you talk about this
in the past
as well um and and i believe we talked
about this with dr seyfried but
isn't isn't the non-toxic treatment
couldn't that
also be used as an adjunct to a more
traditional
um treatment and and see some benefit
there
yeah that's where it looks like it has
by far it's mars promise
is as i talked about that therapeutic
differential earlier
in the press pulse so once you put
somebody on a ketogenic diet
the cancer's weakened and then if you
came in with chemotherapy
and and you could it'd be great to even
try these trials with a lower dose to
see if you could get the same effect or
a better effect with the lower dose
that that is the perfect adjunct to
therapy something that's non-toxic that
helps the cancer cells so i think these
metabolic therapies
they will that's going to be their
primary roles as adjunctive therapies
so your opinion just just pure opinion
do you foresee a world where we are
talking about this a little bit more
than we are today
or are there is it just is it such an
uphill climb too many powers to be too
much money
like is is is this ever going to come
out and be more like common knowledge
i i believe so yeah since i got involved
in this
very few people were talking about it
now there's entire conferences there's
entire departments
for cancer metabolism lou cantley at
cornell wild
he he's involved in cancer metabolism
he's got a drug
that he developed that actually they're
using it in concert with the ketogenic
diet now
so it has become somewhat mainstream
to get there you know what we what we
want to do
the foundation is we can get this trial
rolling it's powered enough with enough
patience
multi-center trial that we could see
this statistical if we see a statistical
benefit it will be received
as that you know it won't be questioned
as a case study or a small trial
um and who knows how that will change
you know already i know there are
oncologists out there
typically younger ones that recommend
ketogenic diets for their patients
and kind of a why not thing we don't
have a ton of data but it's not going to
hurt you
risk reward is balanced so um
yeah i do i think that i think that we
will get there again it takes so long
because the money there's no incentive
to do it but
um there's enough inertia now that i
think we'll get there eventually
and i think when people think of a
ketogenic diet they think of like
okay i've gotta i've gotta drink you
know olive oil or
it's just butter and bacon and with a
ketogenic diet there's a lot of
different ways that you can get into a
state of ketosis
can you talk a little bit about fasting
and how that may play play a role in
getting into ketosis
yeah yeah fasting you know the way i
think about the ketogenic diet is just
the nutritional maintenance of the
fasting state
right so the fasting is the quickest way
to get into ketosis you just stop eating
your
liver burns through all of its
carbohydrates and then your body starts
immobilizing fat
and then you go into ketosis a few days
later so
then if you just maintain a ketogenic
diet after that you're really just
maintaining that fasting state but it's
a nutritional maintenance so you're
eating the fat rather than burning it
off your body
potentially um yeah and it's easy once
you get into that you know there's
if people have been eating a standard
american diet for a long time
there's gonna be some you know right at
the beginning it's bumpy you'll feel
you'll feel like crap for about two
weeks but you can think of this kind of
as a purging time as your body's
switching over
but then you start to feel great i i
some people have a hard time maintaining
it
but you know the foods that you couldn't
eat before butter
um kind of luxurious foods you have kind
of unlimited access
too so i think once you get into it it's
a pretty easy
diet to maintain yeah i couldn't agree
more i i couldn't even
imagine going back to the way i was
eating before um you know at least
fasting for most of the day like
it's it's it's so it's free it doesn't
cost you anything in fact it's cheaper
than buying food it
doesn't require any time you have so
much more resource to go
do other things go go do what you're
doing at the foundation get your work
done like there's so many other cool
things that you can be doing versus
just eating all the time i think that's
a wonderful tool
your third book um ketones uh the fourth
fuel
can you talk a little bit about why you
chose that as the title
well i just wanted to get ketones in
there so it wouldn't be confusing for
people
[Laughter]
but the fourth fuel yeah it was it was
uh you know it was known that proteins
carbohydrates and fats were fuel
um it was not known to tell about the
40s i believe
that ketone bodies were actually
metabolic fuel actually it was earlier
that i think it was the 20s
so it's the fourth field but it's just
sort of under appreciated fuel and it's
the story
really it centers on richard beach's
work it goes way back and talks about
cellular metabolism and then
to kind of you know give you the base of
why ketones are important
and why they're so beneficial but it's a
really look at
richard beach's work and and then moving
forward what are the potentials of of
ketogenic diets or exogenous ketones
for all pretty much all disease states
especially neurological
and i wouldn't normally consider protein
as a fuel source but technically it is
can you explain why that is
yeah protein so when you eat protein
obviously you digest it down to its
amino acids
and then amino acids can't be stored
right unlike fat and sugar
so they they either have to be
incorporated into proteins or they're
burned as fuel
and they can be broken down and then
enter as krebs cycle
intermediates and then be burned
oxidatively so yeah proteins can be a
fuel source they can also go through
gluconeogenesis
and be converted back into glucose and
then glucose is burned
so they are a fuel source traditionally
we think of them as building blocks
right so build proteins from them but
under certain states if you eat a lot of
protein
you'll burn it as fuel you you mentioned
supercharging the metabolism when you're
in this type of a state and i can
certainly confirm that on
a metabolic heart that i used for years
and years measuring people's resting
metabolic rate
if they were eating in a certain way
their metabolic rates would be very high
like way higher than the standard
kind of normal deviation that i would
expect for somebody that was in their
demographic like age height weight and
gender can you explain
why that is so tell me a little bit
about that
you you measured them while they were in
ketosis and found a faster metabolism
yeah so so generally speaking and this
this took me a long time to wrap my head
around
like i would hook people up to a
metabolic analyzer which is measuring
people's breath
uh you know the volume and also the gas
exchange so oxygen in
our you know carbon dioxide out kind of
thing and i would i would
you know do a test for somebody and if
you've been calorie depleted for a
really long time you've done a lot of
diets you do a lot of cardio
we would show pretty easily like yeah
your metabolic rate is going to be
really low we need to
you know work to kind of like increase
this we need to get you off the cardio
eat more calories maybe do some strength
training change their lifestyle a little
bit
but this weird phenomenon would happen
when you know fasting and keto was
getting a little bit more
popular i remember one in particular
where like the dude came in
he his his standard metabolism should
have been
right around 2000 for a resting
metabolic rate or the number of calories
that he burned
sitting in this really comfortable chair
in a dark office and the numbers came
back
you know 20-30 minutes later is 2600 and
i was like wow dude like this is
this is good i mean your metabolism is
certainly like ramped up you need to eat
2 600 calories to be able to maintain
this
he got a little exacerbated and was like
dude i what do you want me to eat like
twinkies and
soda like i can't eat that many calories
if i tried
and it again it it was so difficult to
understand because i've always been told
like unless you're eating
at least your resting metabolic rate
that number's going to drop but it
wasn't happening with these people
and and it you know a lot of you know dr
fung's work helped me understand that
they were they were mobilizing more of
their own stored fat thus they didn't
need
more of the exogenous you know they
don't need food nearly as much
yeah yeah that's that's it very
interesting and i'd be
you know a little dubious about any one
person
um because you just have a hard time
drawing conclusions from any single
metabolic entity right
you want to do it with a group um
theoretically you know
when someone's in ketosis they should be
based their basal metabolism
should be more efficient because they
are
we we know you you burn need less oxygen
to maintain the same amount of energy
from ketones
there are more efficient fuels so per
unit oxygen you'll generate more energy
than with glucose so that that's a
little surprising you know it's it's
when when the exogenous ketones came out
and the cycling teams found out about
them right that's the british cycling
team was the first one to get the ketone
esther
and that's a year they won i think nine
gold medals started competing
really high up in the tour de france and
then all these other cycling teams
caught on and started ordering ketone
ester
and uh they say it's like one of the
guys says it's like a miracle drink
and it just gives them this
unprecedented ability to recover
it's not necessarily really dramatically
performance enhancing
but like week three of the tour de
france their heart rates are lower
and they just have more they're just
recovered more they're not as broken
down
and biochemically that makes sense not
just from a fuel perspective but the
fact that
when you're in ketosis you really
produce fewer free radicals
not only that but you produce more
glutathione
so the free radicals that are being
produced you can
you know an antioxidant capacity to mop
those up
so you know when you're burning that
many calories over
what is the four week race touring
france the ox
how many free radicals you're generating
is just crazy and if you can quench that
then over time you can see why these
guys are just in
way way better shape and veins did a
study where
they gave mice an exogenous ketone
and then the other control mice didn't
get it and then they blasted them with
radiation
measured the dna damage in both mice and
there was a 50
reduction of dna damage in the um the
mice that had the exogenous ketone
so its ability to you know to change
metabolism
one of the the most astonishing things
is this ability to quench free radicals
wow that's super interesting tyler
hamilton talked about that in his book
the secret race where he kind of exposed
you know the us postal team and all the
doping that they were doing in a
three-week race like the tour de france
he said biologically you should be
losing two percent of your power for
every single week
and so his point was like you know watch
watch these guys on the
very second last day when they're doing
a time trial and they should be six
percent
less power output than their first one
and if they're not you may be
a little bit suspect that they're doing
something but yeah he said the same
thing about recovery it was so important
that's why they all took
testosterone it wasn't necessarily for
the performance per se it was more for
the recovery because
yeah it's just so brutal and you're just
accumulating so much waste product like
you talked about that seems like
a super important thing now they were
using ketone esters is that what they
all
do now yeah yeah they make um
yes exactly they use i think it's hvmn
ketone aid those are the companies that
make
there's probably more now that make the
esther but um that's originally
what they were using who knows they
could be using other stuff but i know
they were placing huge orders like 200
000 the stuff is pretty expensive
you know before the tour de france
because they were afraid they wouldn't
get it
and they knew you know what an advantage
it had wow
yeah so that's another thing i was going
to ask about you know esther seem to be
very expensive and also pretty nasty to
take from what i've heard
um but you can also do salts or you
could also do something like an mct oil
um how do those play a factor do people
use those as well
yeah they're very different so the ester
is the most potent by far
and the salts the problem you run into
is you have to
conjugate the beta hydroxybutyrate with
a salt like a magnesium or sodium
and so you can't really get that much of
a dose
because you'll just overwhelm yourself
with salt
mct oil same thing you can bump up
ketones a little bit but you know you're
restricted by how much mct oil you can
get it can be pretty caustic on the
gi tract if you overdo it um so the
ester kind of bypasses all those it's a
way
you can bump up ketones kind of wherever
you want to you know you obviously don't
want to go too high
but you can get three four or five
millimolar pretty easy
but you're right they taste they taste
awful they taste like rocket fuel
i think i think they're starting to get
a little better but um you know they
just taste very unnatural
wow and it is interesting i don't i
don't think a lot of other fuels work
this way correct me if i'm wrong but
with ketones it's really supply driven
right like the more you get the better
that's kind of like a
a linear thing correct you really do
want to drive up those numbers
if you want the very best performance
i think performance wise that makes
perfect sense yeah and i i'm not sure
the studies
you know the performance studies they've
done uh i think they were bumping it up
like 2.5 to 3 millimolar
and um they did one that emulated the
touring france they had guys work out
twice a day for three weeks and then do
a timed that one group was on the
ketones and the other group was not
at the end of the three weeks they had
him do a time trial and the guys in the
ketones had 15 percent more output
and you know in a race like the tour de
france it's divided by
a fraction of one percent so that's a
huge difference
um yeah they bump up higher but you know
like i'm i'm 49 i've
i've i'm more interested now in in
longevity prevention and there's a lot
of data that shows that you really don't
need to get to these really high
millimolar
amounts to have the kind of benefit that
we think we see
we're going to see from ketosis which is
just prevention of
of chronic disease and longevity yeah
interesting yeah i think most of us
would
kind of agree that like driving those
numbers up that high for most of us is
not going to be a
huge benefit uh they haven't called me
to race the tour de france just yet but
uh i kind of doubt they will um
interesting so so going back i want to
ask you i love asking this question
you being you knowing all this stuff you
know about cancer you know
you know ketones all of the the work
that you've done how do you
construct your life what does travis do
every single day what are some practices
that you have that you find to be very
beneficial
you know i lately
you know the most bang for your buck
just for from
health perspective seem for me is like
um
i i do eat a pretty much a ketogenic
diet but
time restricted eating and there's some
new data out that shows
that showed maybe you've seen this uh
when people eat within a certain eating
window
so say they donate for about 16 17 hours
and then they eat during the window they
show that
their monocytes and they're circulating
monocytes so this is the
type of immune cell that causes
inflammation it's just dramatically
reduced
right that's pretty that's pretty
interesting just from not
eating your your systemic inflammation
is reduced um it just goes it goes back
to
to me to i think the body was designed
to do that it was designed it's just
like a pumping mechanism where we were
designed to go through periods of not
eating and that generates these
kind of unforetold health benefits that
should be there but we've repressed
probably now for 100 years due to the
overabundance of food in the standard
american diet
so that's one thing that i've been doing
a lot lately i've just noticed it's had
a big difference i just feel much much
better
um you know other things that
it's incurable i i did
started a chapter by ask looking at all
the people that
lived so um centenarians that lived
beyond 110
and it's it's really cool because they
interview all these people and they ask
them
what's the key to your longevity and so
you get this incredible
variety of answers one lady said it was
drinking dr pepper
one guys that was smoking 12 cigars a
day
one you know it just goes on and on and
on and then i looked at the
the longest living human ever so she
lived to be 122.
her name is jean clement from france and
her lifestyle
was really interesting she married her
she had a rich husband so she didn't
really have to work they did a lot of
hiking playing tennis um she smoked
started smoking
like in her late 20s she'd smoke one or
two cigarettes after dinner
very french and she stopped smoking when
she was 117.
wow and she drank you know she drank
some pork wine she ate some chocolate
she didn't really live what we'd call
this perfect lifestyle but
she was extraordinarily active and
social and so when you look at the
variables epidemiologically that really
matter for longevity all of these people
they have no idea why they put this long
but the one commonality
is they've been they've had really good
social networks
and that epidemiology shows those are
the two most important variables to
longevity it's like your social
integration
i guess the way to sum it up is not
feeling lonely
when you look at lonely people there
they over express inflammatory genes and
under express
really targeted immune responses so
there's this kind of a constant
state of inflammation and i didn't
realize how just important biologically
that is that there's this kind of fuzzy
interface between our feeling our
perception of the world
and our core biology our immune function
and longevity
so that's something you know it's kind
of a nice signpost for a good life you
don't have to worry too much
if you can live to be 122 and smoke a
couple cigarettes every night
for a hundred years then we we don't
need to be worrying about
a lot of the things we're worrying about
but the most important variable is just
to live a good life be integrated in
your community
you know do fun things with people and
your family so it's kind of a nice
sort of message and that's what the data
says i love that that's a great answer
okay now i'm going to throw a wrench
into this and say you get a diagnosis
today of cancer
does anything in your lifestyle change
or do you just continue doing what you
do
if if i got yeah if i get the diagnosis
i would
do what the press pulse
in addition you know of course you look
at every type of cancer
if uh if the standard of care has got a
good
survival rate you clearly you go with
that but i
i would not hesitate to introduce
fasting get a very good ketogenic diet
and then i look at i look at repurposed
drugs there's all kinds of
very safe established drugs like
metformin
um bendazole things like that that have
shown off target effect for cancer
and they've been in the clinic for
decades so you know their safety profile
they won't interfere with standard of
care
and there's many many you know options
with those type of
sort of adjunctive therapies but yeah
that would be where i would start with
those two things
gotcha that's a really great answer man
so you wrote
you wrote three books in four years we
have barely scratched the
surface on um curable which i would love
to invite you back to be able to chat
about those concepts i
i love that it's just so much to get to
an hour-long podcast
how i dude i i can't even write a blog a
month and you wrote three books in four
years what was that process like
it's a lot of sitting on the deck in the
back and uh yeah no it's a frustrating
process i'm always kind of agitated when
i'm writing books because i can't get
them out of my head
so i try to get them done as fast as i
can
um but i love the process you know i've
never just that creative energy is fun
but
yeah you definitely need breaks in
between them wow
um what are you working on for the
future
the future you know the foundation is
taking a lot of time right now we've got
some exciting projects
um i'm just waiting to get inspired for
the next book
we'll see what that is i'm not sure yet
no no rest for the weary it sounds like
that's right wow this has been a super
interesting conversation
um i've again followed your work for a
really long time and
i'm really excited to get you on if you
had to distill all of this down to one
thing i think you've already said it but
if you were to give the listener one
simple tip
from this conversation what would that
be
yeah i would go back to what i said
earlier about not not worrying too much
about the you know the stress the
worrying about
um getting everything just perfect those
type of things um
probably is more detrimental than
getting them perfect if we even know
what perfect
is so i think that's that's a good
message for people is just
you know those those things your grandma
told you get outside
have fun don't worry too much those are
really powerful messages
i love that what a great way to end this
conversation where would you like people
to go to find you connect with your work
and find your foundation
foundation's got a website the
foundation for metabolic cancer
therapies
and then you know i'm trying to stay
more active on twitter i like i actually
like it i know it's got bad
there's some bad sides to it too but
when you follow the right people you
just get
i just the newsfeed fills up with pretty
interesting things
i must be following the wrong people
then
[Laughter]
yeah yeah you got to do it you got to do
it carefully i've fallen into a few mine
traps too
oh man if i get scrolling on twitter i
just i get so
mad within 30 seconds i'm like what am i
doing
i'm not gonna like start a fake fight on
cyberspace with somebody i don't even
know
but i always want to i know yeah it's i
don't
understand that yeah apparently my eyes
just gloss over and i'm able to
mentally just skip over that but yeah
there's just a lot of unnecessary banter
about bs
i don't get it well i'll have to go
through your list of people that you
follow and follow all of those people
i'm definitely not the right
people
uh travis christopherson this is amazing
what a fun conversation thank you so
much for
everything you do for you know your work
with the foundation the books you've
written are fantastic
i love the style that you wrote them in
it feels like a novel
um it's it's they're really engaging and
great and and
yeah i would recommend any of the
listeners to definitely go check them
out and and follow you and your work and
follow you on twitter and
yeah we're just so grateful for you and
for taking the time to be on our show
today
thank you casey thanks for everything
you do too appreciate it thank you very
much
and this has been another episode of
boundless body radio
[Music]
you